Thank you, Dharma sisters and brothers, and warm greetings. As we do, as the great lineage
masters have pointed out to us time and again, always we begin with re-activating our view.
We do that in the three ways, with renunciation, bodhichitta, and pure perception. So, renunciation
or joy and appreciation is gratitude, all the loveliness that's happening inside of
us, outside of us, around us, all around. Let's generate that close, warm-hearted connective
feeling and embodied, living presence. "Oh, I'm so much to be thankful for." Living Dharma,
living lineage masters, this health, my health, my ability to be aware, to be together, to
bring up this gratitude. And then bodhichitta, the heart-mind of enlightenment. We're trying
to take all these little precious moments we have together and have them be oriented so
that they become like the perfect conditions for all beings everywhere to totally have
lasting happiness. Happiness right now, happiness in the long, long, long term, and then completely
eradicate the causes of suffering. So, to achieve full awakening or enlightenment, then
this bodhichitta, this kind of lived, very kind of like, really feel it, feel the kind
of warm-hearted connectiveness, like really the connection, the like, really, "May all
beings be free of suffering. May they be free of the causes of suffering. May they have
happiness. May they have the causes of happiness. I rejoice whenever they feel happy. And I
try to want every being to feel this way, to be happy and free of all suffering." Then,
in addition, this pure perception, then we kind of relax and recognize this kind of,
this natural system is already doing what it does. It's already natural. It's already
flowing. This goodness is already inside of each of us. It's the very ways that we're
kind of always connecting with each other, that we're like co-creating this reality together.
It's all bodhichitta. It's all this Buddha nature. It's all this goodness inside of us,
in between us, around us, then really kind of just confidently like turning that kind
of a vision on, that view that like really kind of relaxes into this goodness nature
that's just the natural kind of state or condition of like all things as they already are, this
kind of pure perception. We turn all three of those on. So the topic for today that I
kind of just thought about is advice for younger Dharma practitioners. It's advice for younger
Dharma
practitioners, and over the past couple days I just kind of reflected on this and kind of came up
with
some thoughts, and so it's a bit of an unusual or not so ordinary kind of format for me. I just
kind
of wrote down like little bullet points, and I thought to go through and just kind of read them,
like little kind of bite-sized things that have really been helpful for me, and they still are
on the path, and it's just helpful for me. So if it's not helpful for you, it's fine, you know,
do like whatever helps like use it, and so I just thought to like really quickly go through kind of
a list of different like kind of things that have really helped me, and so in one way this is like
kind of like reflecting on like you know what's been helpful for me, and then just to kind of share
that, and then specifically for a little bit younger people, younger than me, and the people
who are already kind of interested in Dharma, teachings of the Buddha, or teachings of Guru
Rinpoche, and so it's kind of that's the where this is orienting towards this time. So it's kind of
a little more casual, and I'll read these points, and then give very short kind of like quick
reflections on them, and just kind of go through and like see if anything lands for you, for me,
like see what it opens up. And so this first, you know, and no specific order, it's not a complete
list, okay? So one thing is a different things, oh and I'll share this list later in some kind of
YouTube thing, or so you can see it, don't have to worry about it if you're interested in getting
the
list later. Um, different things help different people. One size doesn't fit all. So that's just
the point of like kind of I need to find out what helps me. What actually helps me bring out my
bodhicitta, bring my warm-hearted connection to others, like and turn my intelligence on my
creativity. Like what does that? What is really helpful? So it's really kind of orient and
emphasize
like what actually helps me, and like then because it helps me, it doesn't necessarily help
everyone,
so to kind of hold it like a little lightly. But really like of all the things I can choose from,
of all the places and people and interests, like to really put extra kind of emphasis on like well,
what is helpful for me to bring out this goodness? And then just because it helps me doesn't mean
it helps other people. Like different things help different people. A second point, is it just
quick?
Everyone has advice to give. Be discerning. We all have wisdom to share actually. We all have
different insights. So kind of it's an endless array of different things that we can learn from.
So we have to be really discerning. Time is limited. Our interests, our talents, are kind of
the ways that we kind of get stuck. They're all very specific to each person, each being.
So like just you know, as I'm giving some advice, whatever that means, like I just say that with a
grain of salt, you know, like everyone has some advice, some insight, something that's helped them.
But each of us has to be discerning about whether it's advice or insight or something that's
actually
kind of resonates with me and helps me. You know, just because someone has advice to give doesn't
mean we have to actually, you know, apply it ourselves. It might not be that helpful for us.
Again, kind of third, motivation is key. The Buddha so emphasized this in all of his teachings.
Mind matters most. Motivation sometimes talked about as a view. And with this point, it kind of
automatically kind of leads us to kind of have this kind of a little bit more of a direct taste
that like we each of us have to take kind of some degree of personal responsibility for our life.
If mind matters most, my mind, my awareness right now, if my motivation and my view is the
principle,
the bedrock element or aspect that's going to define all the other things that happen to me,
then it's my mind. It's my awareness. And so because it's my awareness, my attention, my mind,
then it's up to me to try to be mindful, heartful, and discerning where I put my attention,
how I open my heart when I like kind of like, you know, and more protective and like caring for
something. Maybe I don't want to open to something that's kind of not going to be so helpful for me
.
So mind does matter most according to the Buddha's teachings, which actually means that we have to
tame our own mind. It's up to us and it doesn't have to be so much of a metaphor of taming the mind
.
It can also be a metaphor of opening the mind or a metaphor of relaxing the mind. In here,
mind always means heart-mind, always together, wisdom and compassion, always together. And so
then the natural question isn't what, you know, if something's kind of wrong in the world or
something
I don't like seems wrong to me, then kind of what can I do? But how am I going to engage this? And
then why is that helpful in the larger context of the world? It's because if I am with my mind and
my awareness and I learn to kind of like see kind of with discernment, what's helpful for me? Where
do I fit in? How can I make an offering of my talents or my kind of specific kind of things I
could share? Then it's always oriented within this larger kind of scope of like, how can I help
others? How can I really serve others? How can I be with others in ways that are helpful to them?
And so we have these two sides of my mind matters most in order that I could be more helpful.
It's not just my mind matters most, so I can just be happy by myself. It's more, I want to be happy
,
but my mind, I have to come down to my mind and my heart, open them, relax them into their own
natural goodness. Why? Because everyone has this goodness. And then what helps them?
And here it leads to this, in Buddha's teaching it's become more and more clear for me
that it all comes down to bodhicitta, this heart mind of enlightenment. All the teachings come
down to this point of bodhicitta, the heart mind of enlightenment. And bodhicitta is so amazing.
It's one of the things that's incredible that in every single situation and in every context,
bodhicitta enhances it. Bodhicitta is only helpful because bodhicitta is always shaped by the
living
world, by the living context. It always depends on what's happening around with how bodhicitta
shows up. And that's just a beautiful quality of bodhicitta. It's flexible, absolute nature.
That bodhicitta is totally informed. It's responsive to the living situation that I'm in,
of my mind, of who I'm with, of what's active in the situation, what's the time, what's the place,
what actually serves beings. Bodhicitta shapes itself according to what actually helps beings,
according to my own capabilities of understanding that, of seeing that. Which is a beautiful thing
in that way. Every time I activate bodhicitta, because it's going to be shaped or defined,
colored, flavored by the living conditions, it's going to only boost or enhance those living
conditions because it's actually shaped by the living conditions. This is such an extraordinary
quality. And we can look at this through all the Jnana vehicle teachings of the Buddha,
like the different ways that he talked about the Buddha, great historical Buddha, talked about
wisdom and compassion. Coming down to in Mahayana teachings is bodhicitta, heart, mind of
enlightenment.
We can really look clearly through the vehicle teachings, all the different philosophical
schools and unpack and open bodhicitta further and further, deeper, wider, more vast, more profound
.
And it just keeps going. So at this point, it all comes down to bodhicitta. I think that's quite
true
in the teachings from what I found, from what Venerable Kambharambhich has emphasized,
that it all comes down to bodhicitta. So we always need to highlight that at the front,
which they remind us again and again. This is the main point, bodhicitta.
Another point that Shantadeva emphasized is whatever we do regularly becomes easier to do,
whether it's thinking, feeling or acting. It's just how habits work. So we have to be careful
what habits we grow. Because every single moment we're growing a habit, we're making a thought
easier to have, a feeling easier to feel, an action easier to do. And so then depending on
positive or negative, with how much it's going to actually help my bodhicitta, my bodhicitta,
turn on or be naturally available, then that's a positive habit for me. And so we just have to be
really careful that whatever we actually put our time and energy into, that's actually what gets
strong and easy for us to do. So we should be really careful about what habits we cultivate.
The mind is totally flexible in that way. The habits are totally flexible. It depends on how
we shape them, with how they'll become more normalized. And in this regard, that means also
that having a regular rhythm of meditation makes it easier to do. Our bodies tend to like rhythms.
Our minds follow these habit patterns, that if we want to have meditation like a time set aside for
ourselves, where we can just be actively in touch with our heart and our mind, we're trying to open
and kind of discern and see, open and relax these qualities of love, compassion, wisdom. The four
boundless qualities, infinite love, infinite compassion, infinite sympathetic rejoicing,
this joy, infinite equanimity, including all beings, that if we want to set aside some time
for that, it'll be five minutes, 10 minutes, longer, an hour, two hours, depends. But having a
regular
set kind of rhythm with that makes it easier to do because each habit, the more we do it, it
becomes
easier, more natural for us. I mean, in terms of bodhicitta, the practice of tonglen, sending and
receiving, it's such an inspiring, amazing practice that I found. It's like said to be a heart
practice
of a bodhicapa, those courageous for the enlightenment of all beings. Tonglen, the practice of
giving
our own happiness to others and taking their suffering upon ourselves. I'm not going to go
into how to practice that. There's many, many teachings by extraordinary wisdom beings that
you can get online. This is for free, this instructions on how to practice tonglen.
But it's so easy to do. It's so simple to do. We can do it any time. We can do it quietly. No one
has to know we're doing it. And it uses all of our body, our speech and our mind all at the same
time.
And so in these ways, tonglen is such a special practice. It really activates our bodhicitta,
activates our courageous dignity, kind of like the clarity of our wisdom, the openness and kind
of like a vital energy of our heart and the kind of deep rooted dignity of our courage, of our
power,
of our skillful means. Tonglen, I'm going to take on this suffering onto myself because my Buddha
nature is totally perfectly pure and this suffering just even brightens my Buddha nature, makes it
connect with even more beings. And then on the out breath, I give all my happiness, all the
supportive
conditions that could help uplift beings, whatever it is, heal them, protect them, free them, upl
ift
them, nourish them, care for them, anything that would help a being. Then on the out breath,
kind of like instantly this energy becomes exactly what each being needs, instantly. And they're so
happy, they're so relieved, they're so joyful. And then on the in breath, I take the suffering
again,
it becomes this energy fuel power for my own bodhicitta to shine on more brightly.
On the out breath, they feel uplifted, more powerful, more relaxed, more natural, more creative.
In breath, out breath, this practice of Tonglen is such a good essential practice. It's the heart
of
the kind of way of the bodhisattva and it's also the heart of Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhism, bodhic
itta.
Another point that I found super helpful for myself is if I can just try to see the Buddha
nature in others first. If I kind of train my mind to think of Buddha nature of others first,
instead of what's wrong, or what they say that I don't like, what's going on in the world that
I'm uncomfortable with, that I don't agree with, instead of that, like highlight the Buddha nature
aspect first. And this puts kind of the bodhicitta at the front. And then this makes it so much
easier
the step for us to kind of relax into pure perception, this view of Tibetan Buddhism,
where we're seeing the Buddha nature in all beings all the time, and it's glowing more
brightly and a much kind of greater arrays of kind of like expressions. It's like endless display
of
pure ways that Buddha nature can shine. And so just like training myself, I'll see the Buddha
nature first in others and in myself, kind of have that as something I keep coming back to.
The Buddha nature of others first, then it's so much easier to love others,
care for them, because you know, they're so valuable. Each being is so amazingly special,
like literally have enlightened nature. And I try to kind of connect with that
enlightened nature first before my own reactive patterns turn on and take over.
And I do that for myself too. I have this Buddha nature, this goodness. It's perfect. It's always
there. And I try to really kind of be with that as kind of more first thought, the first way of
engaging a situation. This immediately reorients kind of a reframes life, see the Buddha nature
and others in oneself first. And then we're looking in the world, this another point is really all
of
us, we're just trying to be happy and avoid suffering. We all are. No matter our age, our
reputation, our job, our situation, all these things are just kind of superficial features
in regard and like compared with every single moment. We're just trying to not suffer and we
want to be happy. This is really a common ground for all sentient beings. We all want to be happy.
No one wants to suffer. Then if we put this like more at the front of our attention,
all this being out there causing trouble, they're just so unhappy. They're causing so much
suffering.
They don't want to cause suffering, but they don't know how to be happy. Instead, they're just
causing
so much trouble for everyone. Instead of seeing them as beings automatically bad, we want to
throw them away. Oh, this is really like they're really hurt. And it goes to that kind of common
saying that hurt people hurt people. We are hurt and that's why we hurt others. Instead, if we're
like, oh, we all are hurting. What can I do to really kind of care for others better? And with
wisdom, to distinguish different things help different people. Okay, you're hurting and you
have so many beautiful things to offer. Okay, this is common ground. We can look for the valuable
aspect of the valuable kind of contributions each of which I'm making all the time. Start there
with
the Buddha nature and with the like the little lovely little delightful things that each person
is doing. Everyone has so much they're sharing all the time. So really highlight kind of the
special qualities first with the recognition of we're all just kind of like winging this thing.
Why? We don't want to suffer. We want to be happy. Venerable Kemperumice is said different times
teaching from the Buddha. Poor people have poor people problems. Rich people have rich people
problems. Single people have single people problems. Married people, partnered people,
married people have married people problems. Like it's just some sorrow like that. There's
not a spot in some sorrow that's not suffering, which isn't why to say that that's the end of the
story. That's just the first noble truth the Buddha taught. It's their suffering. Every situation
is
always fragile. Even if it's good for a bit, then it changes and kind of loses that kind of
goodness
it had. Things are constantly moving interdependent. And so like to kind of like release that idea
that there's some spot in some sorrow that's actually perfect. The Buddha said this is not true.
Every spot in some sorrow, every time we have duality mind, that unrealistically grasps onto
kind of a moving flow, tries to freeze it and lock it in place. Anytime we do that,
this grasping mind, duality mind, always is going to be suffering. And so that's kind of like this
bedrock understanding in buddhism. We need to release the grasping.
Kempo Sanramicce said to me once, like straight directly to me, the grass is always greener.
Even if there's not a space in some sorrow that's perfect,
we'll always think well maybe that place is better. This is also an endless game.
Always going to be something better, always going to be someone smarter, always going to be
something
more lovely, more interesting. It's always going to be some better. Grass is always greener. And
oftentimes we're only highlighting part that we like of a situation we're not in, and we're not
seeing the full picture of what it is. So the lived experience of something is quite different than
like
little being with it for five minutes, you know. Being in an actual ongoing relationship is quite
different than a honeymoon period of a relationship. They both have their place, but actually
living in
relationship with the world, with others, with ourselves, is quite involved, and it's much more
multifaceted, much more layered, much more lovely and well-rounded than just kind of seeing
something
at a distance. Oh, this is maybe the grass is greener over there. Then oftentimes we can like
kind of unintelligently give up all these amazingly good things we already have right in our lap.
Thinking that there's some better place over there that doesn't have any problems.
The great master, Vimala Mitra, once said a line in this chesaninte. Vimala Mitra said,
"There will never be a time when everything is finished the way you want it.
It is like pursuing a mirage for water. There will never be a time when everything is finished the
way you want it. It is like pursuing a mirage for water." I once asked a question publicly in this
room. I forget the question I asked, but that was the answer he gave me. There will never be a time
when everything is finished the way you want it. It is like pursuing a mirage for water. Don't wait
for everything to be perfect and get exactly the way I want it. Before I do things like a dharma
practice or generate bhorichitta or have a kindness towards others or kind of stop and like watch
my
mind for a few minutes. Don't try to get everything in perfect position and then I'll do the thing
that's my highest priority because it's not ever going to be together in a perfect way the way we
want it. It literally just never happens in samsara like that. That's been really helpful for me to
remember. There's a lot of ways I can waste my own time trying to make things all kind of with
an arrangement that's proper perfect. Trying to make a nice setting a nice arrangement kind of like
good enough is quite different than perfect. And so that's also related to contentment. Sometimes
good enough is just good enough. Be content with what we have and then hold the main point close.
bhorichitta activating or bhorichitta showing up for other beings loving them fully.
So this goes to another point same thing. Spend time learning about what's really important to me.
Like really spend extra time and energy. If there's something I'm really passionate about
that's really important to me like put extra time in that. Don't just put it off in some bucket
list
you might get to one of these days but really put the thing that's really the high priority that's
like really special to me like try to keep it right in the front. This is a good dharma practice
too.
Make ongoing efforts to care for friendships and one's health.
Life is often easier in good company when you're not sick.
Friendships and good health they're really very very special.
Friendships having good friends good company that's such a it's such a valuable and like really
amazing thing. This sangha and good health it's just so much easier when we have good health
like use our mind and use our body like to the purpose that we want to use it for for dharma.
You know for love, compassion, wisdom. Use it while it's easier when we're not sick.
Kind of a related note make an effort to show up at funerals.
It makes a really big difference to all everyone left behind. All the beings are still alive.
You know funerals are one of those big significant events in everyone's life and in the lives of
the
person who's died and the lives of those who are around them. Try to really make an effort. This
makes a really big difference. I see this more and more as I grow a little older. Another point
celebrate others happiness and their good qualities. Really just celebrate others like
highlight the good qualities and just kind of love on them you know. Like there's just so much
beauty
in the world. Everyone has so many amazing qualities like really highlight those and celebrate them
.
Like let them know you know. It's really good. It helps and kind of creates a positive feedback
loop for people to be encouraged you know for their talent they feel seen and you're seeing
them. It's lovely to see others like their goodness and then the goodness kind of shines brighter.
Another point um younger people I think are on the leading edge of evolution.
Largely because they're just younger. They're not yet for the most part usually younger people with
less time being alive. They just haven't been as set in their ways. They're not as locked into
a certain worldview yet. And so as time kind of moves on and there's more things emerging.
There's more kind of relationship in the universe just because time and space like there's more of
a fullness happening than the younger people haven't yet been set into a specific pattern.
And so they're literally like kind of the result of what's current plus. And so there's a big
opportunity there that as we're younger not yet set in our views not yet as ad set in certain
habits.
Then we don't have to like do all the extra work of trying to undo bad habits or unbox certain
views that aren't so helpful for us. Given like Mahayana view we've been born countless times
endless. But in this life in this fresher body that this kind of how it works with this fresh
body this time around there's certain habits that haven't yet locked in as strongly when our body's
younger. And so it's kind of in one way a little easier to take on kind of views that haven't yet
been trained in us or entrained in us. At the same time point about humility. Humility basically
means
we're just paying attention because each of us is always a part of a larger story many stories
actually. Humility just is like wow I'm really a part of like I'm standing on the shoulders always
like I'm depending on others always. I'm always kind of like enjoying the wealth of all the work
and efforts and insights innovations like kind of the beauty and the things that like the beings
have
kind of sustained and preserved for so long now. Humility is just seeing that clearly wow and then
naturally I'll be grateful. Look at all these things I get to enjoy I didn't have to figure out.
Just oh wow like take a kind of like a humble grateful position. And this really just means
I'm actually paying attention to cause condition and effect. It's not some you know devout virtuous
kind of like way like a certain religious thing. It just means I'm really paying attention to
relationships. Wow it's amazing all the things that I've just immediately come into and I'm
boosted by because of all the hard effort of so many other beings. Wow thank you. I mean really
thank you so much. Um you don't have to reinvent every wheel. Be selective save yourself some time.
We don't have to do everything from scratch.
It's like be discerning. Like what do I want to use that you know I we have to in the end for
Buddhists see everything for ourself. But some things we just can't. We don't have time. Do I
need to see an atom for myself. Am I going to learn to actually test that myself. Let's say it
takes a
life. So some things we just have to you know be real clear. What do I really want to go really
thoroughly see for myself and what else am I going to have in good faith. We don't have to reinvent
everything for ourselves. Some things that's great but everything is not really a realistic
possibility.
One point that sometimes can be hard to hear but it's I don't know depends it's very kind of like
real too. No one automatically becomes an elder just by growing older or having grandkids.
This is to the Buddhist point of wisdom and compassion have to be consciously cultivated
and grown or opened into. Wisdom doesn't just you know magically turn on for some beings and not
for others. We actually have to consciously engage a practice or a process a path of actually
kind of opening into our wisdom and into our compassion. It doesn't just automatically happen
as time happens. Like we've been around again Mahayana Buddhism for countless lives. We don't
automatically just become enlightened. The Buddha really taught that no one accidentally becomes
enlightened. It doesn't happen magically like that in the sense of it's just some people get
to wake up and others don't just because they had good luck or something like that. No wisdom is
always intentionally cultivated and so like just it's good to see you know just because we're
getting older doesn't mean we're getting wiser or more compassionate or more kind. So we actually
if we're curious or like care about becoming wiser and more compassionate we have to cultivate that
in ourselves. We have to follow some kind of path that really cares about wisdom and compassion and
we have to put time and energy into that path. Another point is once we agree to play a certain
game a certain language have a certain kind of conversation. Once we agree to play a certain game
we have to follow the rules of that game in good faith. This makes us trustworthy. Later when we
change games the rules change. Rules are not arbitrary sorry rules are arbitrary but they're
required between people. Otherwise there's no foundation for trust. So this is to say you know
everything is like a dream but dreams all always follow rules or patterns. It's like a game. Games
are totally arbitrary but once we agree to play a game like tennis then all of a sudden
automatically
there's certain rules turn on like inbounds out of bounds cheating playing fair who wins who loses
and then once the tennis game's over then the rules dissolve. We play another game soccer we
play another game the buddhist game we play another game the you know be a parent game like
all these are just dreams patterns rules systems that we're in and the rules and the patterns are
somewhat arbitrary. They can go this way or that way but when we're playing a game with other
people
and there's other people and we agree to the rules of that game we can't change the rules
mid game. That's called bad faith and people stop trusting us. In buddhist in terms of debate
you lose automatically if you change the rules mid debate. You can't change the topic of the debate
mid mid debate. You can't say let's talk about relative truth and mid debate you'd start using
all this absolute kind of view. Then you automatically forfeit the debate if you do that.
It causes bad faith. People can't trust if you just change the rules mid game their rules their
arbitrary but once we do agree to them in a certain context in a certain game in a certain
relationship then we have to show up on our side of the agreement. That just makes us a trustworthy
person and then to that point find trustworthy friends. There's a buddhist saying of like even
if you're kind of a regular tree in the middle of a sandalwood forest over time you start to
smell like sandalwood too. Find good company good friends people that bring out your virtuous
qualities like bodhicitta. It really helps on the path. We all have habits and habits they're only
bad or good in terms of how much they cover up our buddha nature. A good habit is something
that opens and reveals our buddha nature. A bad habit is something that kind of closes our buddha
nature or covers it up and different things do that for different people. So we have to recognize
for ourselves what's a good habit that helps me connect to my buddha nature. What's a bad habit
that closes that up closes that connection or dims that brightness and just have to be kind of
honest
with myself about that. But it's not that my bad habits or everyone's bad habits or my good habits
or everyone's good habits. Different things help buddha nature turn on and off in different beings.
Kind of a little bit more of a philosophical sequence here is that everything is contextual
like a game or a dream but having too many games to choose from too many options
usually leads to extreme relativism like there's no truth you know there's just endless options
there's endless rules call it sliding signifiers this is endless endless ways things can be
and while it's true that everything is context dependent or everything's contextual
then the bodhisattva view says that everything's contextual but what is this context what is this
game i'm playing what is this system i'm a part of what is this lineage i'm part of what is this
uh job that i'm in the context defines a lot of the rules are kind of like the ways that something
is and so that kind of lessens the infinite contextualism which also means we need to be
discerning about what context we put ourselves in what relationships we want to be a part of what
jobs do we want to have this all goes to the eightfold noble path of the buddha to try to take
a kind of extra kind of carefulness or being full of care with how we use our body our speech in
our
mind um but it's not just that there's endless options in mayana buddhism specifically the
nirvatriyana buddhism they also recognize there is such a thing as absolute truth there is an
unchanging way that's not dependent on causes and conditions and this is more related to how we
poise our mind absolute buddha nature or absolute bodhicitta it's not just endlessly sliding
contexts
there is actually an unchanging awareness that's called absolute truth in buddhism
and then the next point in addition to that is absolute truth or that aspect of absolute
buddha nature bodhicitta it always shows up in a body in a context in a world in relationality
and so that absolute truth always has a relative expression it always relates to it always is in
touch with so it always requires body always requires a world enactment practice being doing
there's always relative and absolute truths they're always together and then how to move between
these games these stories these dreams these relationships we're in how to move between them
elegantly without causing too much trouble you know do no harm that's kind of very much comes
down to living the view of the middle way the manyamaka great manyamaka this is absolute again
absolute buddha nature or absolute bodhicitta emptiness all games are empty of any fixed rigid
rules there's an awareness that is totally flexible and open that awareness always expresses itself
in body embodied in worlds moving between the different worlds the different dreams the
different relationships and contexts that happens when we have a more stable view of the middle way
that a mind poised for awakening poised to be actively in touch with a living changing
circumstances but not stuck onto it not grasping on to the moving dynamics of a living system
whether it's my mind or my heart my body my speech or my mind so i'll say just a few more and there
's
like i've generated many pages of this um just like yesterday a little bit i mean just did this
really quickly actually um i'll say a few more than we'll practice dujum tersar nundro um
going deep into a handful of interests is very practical in the end we really do have to root
ourselves somewhere and that means loyalty and commitment make a big difference in terms of
learning and growing if we stay put if we really stick around a spot long enough where the
relationships of the spot are are in our kind of intuition with what happens there our ability to
see a variety of patterns to see how the different seasonal shifts of a place of a lineage of a
time
of a relationship if we really choose to stay put in a spot we'll be able to appreciate more of the
fullness or richness of that spot and so it's practical we can't if we just keep moving between
places and kind of moving all the time moving our thoughts moving our body then we'll never
really have that richness or fullness of kind of like actually the fullness of kind of each place
that we're at there we're in so we need to be practical like life will do this to us anyway
it'll hold us accountable to certain spots and so and that's lovely because it means we're being
held we're actually a part of something we all want to belong we're always we all want to be
a part of something greater than just me that's just a natural connection it's a natural urge
a longing of buddha nature be with you know in relationship dependently arisen
so we should be really clear about where do i want to go deep and then the thing is is wherever
we go deep it automatically is connected with these other places that i'm at not immediately at
it's all interdependence so we can actually use the kind of like the power the connection the
interest the intelligence of these other places that were not at so much we actually because they
sync up interdependence we can use them to inform us over time if we get really good at being in a
spot in a way in a lineage in a practice we get really good at it it automatically syncs up with
other things and we can use the intelligence and those connections between those things
to actually boost ourselves that's kind of like in the ocean you get the whole energy of the ocean
just by being in one spot of it by being in a wave it's like that interdependence is like that
so it's more like being in a generative field and kind of like enriching a certain spot in the
field
and once we pacify it we enrich or nourish it then we can magnetize other fields to have a bigger
field this is kind of part of like this mahayana buddhism practice so yeah there's really so many
points i mean i have many many more points but in all all in all like kind of we'll just go into
the due to interstart practice but kind of like advice for you know younger dharma practitioners
it really does all come down to bodhicitta you have to see that for yourself look at it see if
it's true or not and find reliable guides that will help you and like become a reliable person
who like is there a trustworthy person like trustworthy like that's you know a reliable
guide is going to like actually you know it's like an you know a student like in an educational
process like be a good student and then like find a good teacher and then the learning the
education happens so much more easily when we're both with a good teacher because we like really
kind of carefully discern that we try to be a good student intelligent receptive humble interested
honest kind of upfront work hard then have bodhicitta is the kind of core bedrock intention
knowing that there's a variety of ways to live in the world there's so many different things we can
do we have to kind of you know care for certain parts of it and not for others it is just a
practical feature of sentient awareness time body mind we have to like go deep somewhere if we're
going to do that and we can do that it's not a problem as long as we keep an open mind fresh
perspective like i'm more of a mind and heart poised like in the middle way with the bodhicitta
kind of like actively kind of sparkling alive like really trying to show up with kind of a careful
ness
and like a sensitive like helpfulness a loving quality a warm-hearted quality to be with others
also with like an intelligent mind open mind not a mind so open that our brain falls out
but like open but very clear and precise you know not narrow and tight not open open so there
were wishy-washy like open compassionate very clear and precise following patterns of cause
condition and effect these are all just different things that are just core buddhist frameworks
they're core buddhist insights that the buddhas so like generously taught all of us that the living
wisdom masters we're around like venerable kenberimiches we can see this in our own eyes our own
ears we can see how they're doing this they're living it these kind of core principles all the
time and so amazing and in the end like as we go further in the path as we kind of get more relaxed
more open as bodhicitta becomes more normal as we become just more natural and confident and okay
with ourselves okay with each other this goodness is there then it naturally becomes more buoyant
we have more fun more joy you know like more actual like feeling of being a part of something
of connected we're resonating with things we're a part of this earth we're part of this larger
story we're always a part of this larger thing so how can i help what can i do what really what do
i love what am i passionate about who will help support that what are others passionate about that
how can i support them we're doing this together it's kind of dream team how can we make this a
better dream for more dream beings to get the dream result of freedom full freedom awakening
that's the kind of burning question for bodhisattva and in the end there's no finish line
the dream doesn't end just keeps going helping beings and they're all dream-like beings so we
kind of lighten that kind of like tension around having to finish it we lighten the tension around
it being one fixed thing we can kind of like let our energy kind of more flow we see the power of
each moment there's so many worlds there's so many beings in every moment every moment matters it's
always going to ripple throughout time and space forever so like really high quality moments love
compassion wisdom do what we can see when we're getting stuck try to kindly kind of relax that
forgive that ourselves like and also clearly kind of like have that kind of buoyancy of brightness
of bodhich to come out and like start again it's another moment reconnect to dharma reconnect to
our goodness reconnect to the goodness and others so thank you friends it's always kind of lovely
to just kind of reflect on the dharma and reflect on it with you definitely from my own mind it's
very helpful just to kind of be with the teachings for a little longer and then in addition to
practice them so here we'll go into the dujum tarsar nandro practice revealed by his holiness
dujum Rinpoche and we'll start with the prayer of calling the lama from afar so here we already
recited seven line prayer and lineage prayers so we'll just recite seven line prayer once
and then we'll go right into this calling the lama from afar by his holiness dujum Rinpoche
so thanks so much very very much friends Tashulay really appreciate if you want to see these points
all written out i'll put it in the youtube video at the bottom and there's many more points i didn
't
get to just the limit of time so really genuinely thank you
calling the lama from afar after the seven line prayer
thank you thank you all thought to just take a few more minutes to mention just a few more
kind of reflections that have really helped me a lot in terms of advice for kind of younger
dharma practitioners this topic i was just going to read through a few quickly and then just for
a few minutes so this is just continuing the thread from where we were following pith instructions
helps keep things simple and deep but fully unpacking and resonating with those same pith
instructions requires ongoing study and embodiment and time really takes time to open those pith
instructions but using those pith instructions saves us a lot of time don't hurt yourself
unnecessarily so be full of care or careful the healing really takes a lot of time so the world
suffering samsara is suffering we're all going to get hurt so like just be really careful not to
hurt yourself unnecessarily that also means like discernment there's a lot of things out in the
world that are really harmful so like use your own wisdom and intelligence to kind of intelligently
not let in certain things that are not worth it it's not worth getting hurt because really taking
the time to heal it really is very involved this one person sean sb and hargens he had a statement
that helped me take things seriously but with a light touch this is like helps me resonate with
like staying with an open mind take things seriously like really consider something thoroughly
like with a really open mind but hold it really lightly because maybe we don't know you know
maybe it's true maybe not but to imaginatively consider other possibilities is a really helpful
practice to orient towards emptiness towards the flexibility of our awareness take it seriously
really consider it but hold it really really lightly it's in the end it's all just a dream
anyway so it lines up with these poor mahayana practices thought to mention especially it seems
like a lot of younger people that if you're feeling depressed this one bit of advice i heard
this one teacher said um look around you and see if anyone needs any help and just help them a
little bit if you really feel down like try to see someone else around and like connect with them
just offer a little bit of help it can really kind of open things up and then if you're really
kind of feeling depressed anxious is in really kind of very kind of like profound way then it's
very much worth it to seek professional help there's experts of all these different kinds of
modalities including dharma modalities if we want to really go deep in the dharma find a really
good
dharma teacher but if we want to really if we hurt in a certain way we're having a really kind of
very serious challenge that keeps coming up then find the expert of that field it's really worth
your time your valuable especially every one of us is such an incredible amazing buddha in the
making we all have buddha nature really need to honor this and if we can work with guidance of
really qualified experts related to the specific thing we need help with it's very much worth it
so kind of do yourself a favor and kind of care for your buddha nature that way
uh a bit of advice folks our kin serum gave spend some time every day just being quiet with
yourself
and get to know your own heart and mind just have a little bit of at least a little bit of quiet
time
just with yourself every day and i recently heard from joseph goldstein he quoted one of his first
dharma teachers monindra monindra g said if you want to understand your mind sit down and observe
it if you want to understand your mind sit down and observe it it's so simple it's so lovely
it's right here our mind
separate one people i found people really live really really love to connect with others about
what they love what they're interested in so like ask them what do you love and then really listen
and pay attention with a lot of curiosity this is like a very easy way to kind of like get to
know someone and to like really kind of be with them in a way that they're really kind of like
passionately on fire you know oh what do you love and then really listen and really have genuine
interest on kind of what they share this is like we all want to connect to know and then another
way we connect is really through suffering suffering is a big doorway to dharma it's a big
doorway to connect with each other we all suffer so kind of another joseph goldstein quotes that
use your suffering wisely suffering can really help you understand you're not alone
all these beings all of us are suffering i'm not the only one in this vulnerable spot of my
suffering something that hurts it's something that's vulnerable and tender it actually is the
kind of gateway the doorway into me connecting with others because i can't guard and defend that
spot as easily i have to be open to some kind of responsiveness from the world this suffering is
actually really a doorway to compassion caring for others their suffering and caring for ourselves
like kind of our own dependence you know our own in like the ability to that we're vulnerable
that we depend on this world that's a big powerful spot actually and then it's just a couple more
we
can't change something we're not aware of it's very difficult to change anything if we don't know
it's there and so one of the practical things that all meditating traditions do is they they
have a function of metacognition instead of for example thinking i am anger i think no i am like
i am i am aware of anger so anger is not me i am aware of my thinking there are thinking's not me
if we're aware of this kind of part that we before we thought it was me then we're just
aware of it like oh experience of anger it's called metacognition all of a sudden we're aware
of our anger we're aware of our thought and then our space and our perspective is bigger
this is the general function of almost any every single meditation called metacognition
and gradually we expand this and open this further and further to include more and more objects
which
means more and more relationality more and more cause condition and effect and then a final thing
especially for the younger ones uh no one really knows what the world's going to be like in 20
years like the bedrock basics are going to be the same four noble truths the basics are going to be
the same but in terms of a lot of the outer kind of more superficial features of what will be kind
of trending what will be a good job to have like really like unusual period of time we people
really
don't know 20 years out at this point it'll be very hard to predict this now thus having a
flexible ability to be kind of adaptive to be intelligent in a variety of situations that
becomes a very helpful skill learn how to be flexible learn how to be broad and general and
also really deep learn how to be like kind of very attentive but very fluid very general very
specialized so this both and thinking so that's called a polarity optimize both sides of a polarity
relative and absolute truth for example then this is kind of makes it kind of
makes us very adaptive as things change and then just the final thing is always dedicate the merit
any good thing you do it can be right after you do it dedicate the merit for the benefit of all
beings or it could be a long time after you do it and you forgot to you could dedicate the merit
of all my past lives like any good thing i ever did i dedicate that merit so that all beings are
free right now or you can dedicate the merit of other buddhas in the past present and future and
all the peacemakers in the past present and future that was a great extraordinary lines
where we're teaching of the buddha to dedicate the merit for the benefit of all beings be free of
suffering and have happiness and the causes of happiness so thank you friends thank you